What is Character Encoding?
ASCII was the first character encoding standard (also called character set). ASCII defined 128 different alphanumeric characters that 
could be used on the internet: numbers (0-9), English letters (A-Z), and some special characters like ! $ + - ( ) @ < > .

ANSI (Windows-1252) was the original Windows character set, with support for 256 different character codes.

ISO-8859-1 was the default character set for HTML 4. This character set also supported 256 different character codes.

Because ANSI and ISO-8859-1 were so limited, HTML 4 also supported UTF-8.

UTF-8 (Unicode) covers almost all of the characters and symbols in the world.

The default character encoding for HTML5 is UTF-8.

Whether such a meta tag is present or not, browsers and user agents will first look at the HTTP headers to find encoding 
information there. Actually, they will even before that honor user settings and do BOM sniffing, as described in section 
8.2.2.1 Determining the character encoding in HTML5 CR – which is in this issue a description of the reality rather than 
just proposed norm.

So the answer is really “it depends”. In many cases, the meta tag is ignored, so omitting it has no effect, except perhaps in situations
where the HTML document is saved locally (so that HTTP headers are lost). In many other cases, it is not ignored, but if it is omitted, 
browsers will infer the correct encoding anyway. And in some cases, where the tag happens to be the only thing that makes the browser use
the right encoding, omitting it will cause wrong interpretation of data, typically so that bytes are interpreted in windows-1252 encoding.
What this matters depends on the actual content.


Что такое кодировка символов?
ASCII был первым стандартом кодирования символов (также называемым набором символов). ASCII определил 128 различных буквенно-цифровых символов, которые
может использоваться в Интернете: цифры (0-9), английские буквы (A-Z) и некоторые специальные символы, как! $ + - () @ <>.

ANSI (Windows-1252) был оригинальным набором символов Windows с поддержкой 256 различных кодов символов.

ISO-8859-1 был стандартным набором символов для HTML 4. Этот набор символов также поддерживал 256 различных кодов символов.

Поскольку ANSI и ISO-8859-1 были настолько ограниченными, HTML 4 также поддерживал UTF-8.

UTF-8 (Unicode) охватывает почти все символы и символы в мире.

Кодировка символов по умолчанию для HTML5 - UTF-8.

Является ли такой метатег присутствием или нет, браузеры и пользовательские агенты сначала будут искать заголовки HTTP, чтобы найти кодировку
информация там. Фактически, они будут еще до того, как будут соблюдаться пользовательские настройки и будут обманывать спецификации, как описано в разделе
8.2.2.1 Определение кодировки символов в HTML5 CR - в этом вопросе приводится описание реальности, а не
только что предложенная норма.

Поэтому ответ действительно «зависит». Во многих случаях метатег игнорируется, поэтому его отсутствие не влияет, за исключением, возможно, ситуаций
где HTML-документ сохраняется локально (так что заголовки HTTP теряются). Во многих других случаях он не игнорируется, но если он опускается,
браузеры все равно выведут правильную кодировку. И в некоторых случаях, когда тег является единственной вещью, которая делает использование браузера
правильное кодирование, опуская его, вызовет неправильную интерпретацию данных, как правило, так, чтобы байты интерпретировались в кодировке Windows-1252.
Это зависит от фактического содержания.
